[MUSIC]
This is an introduction to the relevant
case law on European company law.
We start with DeLorme.
DeLorme was a tax law case.
DeLorme PLC wanted to move its de
facto head office, the tax residence,
to the Netherlands because of
the more favorable tax regime there.
While at the same time it planned
to remain a company subject to
UK company law.
The UK Treasury Department
refused permission for
the transfer of seat which
is necessary under UK law.
The EU law implications of this, is that,
because of this refusal of the UK Treasury
Department, to allow the transfer of
the de facto head office DeLorme refer the
question to the European Court of Justice.
On whether or not the treaty, or the
functioning of the EU preclude a member
state from obstructing the transfer of the
de facto head office from a member state.
The decision of the Court was that
the Court concluded that this issue falls
outside the scope of the treaty provisions
on the freedom of establishment.
Moreover, the Court added obiter
dictum some comments regarding several
conflicts of law questions.
The DeLorme judgement was recently
confirmed by the Cartesio decision.
In the centrals case,
two Danes established centrals
limited under UK company law.
The company was to trade
only in Denmark however.
And the incorporators clearly stated that
they had established the entity under UK
company law solely to avoid the minimum
capitalization requirement for
Danish limited liability companies.
The Danish Commercial Registry considered
this to be an unlawful circumvention of
the Danish minimum
capitalization rules and so
refused to register the company's
branch office in Denmark.
Once again, the question of compatability
with the provisions on freedom of
establishment are at stake.
In particular, the question was
referred to the EU Court whether it is
compatible with freedom of establishment,
to refuse registration of a branch,
of a lawfully founded company that has its
registered office in another member state,
but in which the company does not
itself carry on any business.
First, the Court ruled that where
a company exercises its freedom of
establishment under the treaty,
the member states are prohibited from
discriminating against this company on the
ground that it was formed in accordance
with the law of another member state in
which it has its registered office, but
does not carry on any business.
Second, the state is not
authorized to restrict freedom of
establishment on the ground of protecting
creditors, or preventing fraud if there
are other ways of countering fraud or
protecting creditors.
Besides, the Court points to
the availability to member states of
the option of adopting EU harmonizing
legislation in this area of company law.
In this leading case,
the Court took quite a liberal approach
in the context of company rights.
Moreover, the Court considers
the conditions governing abuses of
EU law restrictive.
In the Inspire Art case,
a Dutchman established the company Inspire
Art Limited under the laws of England and
Wales, and requested the registration
of the company's Dutch branch office
at the commercial registry
in the Netherlands.
The registry took the position
that specific Dutch rules for
foreign entities registered in the
Netherlands were to apply to the company.
As a consequence, Inspire Art, Limited
would have been required inter alia to
use a company name indicating
its foreign origin and comply
with the minimum capitalization rules for
Dutch limited liability companies.
The Court continued its tendency
of deciding in favor of freedom of
establishment by holding that rules
submitting pseudo-foreign companies to
the company law of the host
state were inadmissible.
It lay down that a foreign company is
not only to be respected as a legal
entity having the right to be
a party to legal proceedings but
rather has to be respected as such.
That is,
as a foreign company that is subject to
the company law of its
state of incorporation.
Any adjustment to the company
law of the host state is hence
not compatible with EU law.
And the Court went further
in the Uberseering case.
All the directors of Uberseering BV,
a limited liability company organized
under Dutch law, but resident in Germany.
As a consequence, in accordance with
current thinking on company seats,
the German courts decided that,
owing to the location of
the company's principle office, German
com, corporate laws apply to the company.
The Dutch corporate entity was
therefore dismissed from court
proceedings in Germany.
In the judgement, the court ruled that
it was incompatible with the freedom of
establishment rules guaranteed in the
treaty for a member state to deny legal
capacity and standing to sue or be sued
in courts to a company formed in a member
state which moves its central place of
administration to another member state.
Against the expectations of many legal
commentators and the recommendation of
the Advocate General, the Court also held
that where a company incorporated in
another member state exercises its freedom
of establishment in another member state,
that other member state is required to
recognize the company's legal capacity,
and capacity to be a party
to legal proceedings,
which it enjoys under the law
of its state of incorporation.
Following this judgment,
a company incorporated in
an EU member state is entitled to rely on
the principle of freedom of establishment
to contest any refusal by a host state
to recognize it as a legal entity
with a capacity to enter into contract,
and to be a party to legal proceedings.
As a matter of German law,
this decision signals the end of
the current practice whereby the lega-,
legal capacity of foreign
incorporated companies is not
recognized where the effective seat
of administration is in Germany.
It is also certain to provoke much
academic discussion on the question of
whether and if so to the extent to
which the accepted phenomenon of full
recognition of the legal
capacity of the pseudo foreign
company within the single market will be
extended to other areas of company law.
So, we're back on Cartesio.
Cartesio was an Hungarian limited
partnership whose application for
registration of the transfer of
its seat to Italy was rejected by
the Hungarian Court of Registration.
Cartesio intended only to transfer
its de facto head office to Italy,
while continuing to operate
under Hungarian company law.
But because of the refusal
to enter transferral or
the de facto head office in
the Hungarian company register,
the question was referred to
the European Court of Justice.
To determine whether the rules in
the treaty preclude a member state from
imposing an outright ban on
a company incorporated under its
legislation transferring its de facto
head office to another member state,
without having to be wound
up in Hungary first, and
to have the seat transfer entered
in the Hungarian company register.
It should be underlined that
the Cartesio case is to
a considerable extent similar to
the DeLorme decision, since it
also raises the question of the transfer
abroad of the de facto head office.
The Court did not overrule its DeLorme
decision, which allows Member States to
restrict the transfer of the central
administration of a company abroad.
On the country, the Court reaffirm its
DeLorme doctrine when the Court stated,
as Community law now
stands the Articles are to
be interpreted as not precluding
legislation of a Member State.
Under which a comp-,
company incorporated under the law of
that member state may not transfer its
seat to another member
state whilst retaining its
status as a company governed by the law
of the member state of incorporation.
Slightly surprising was the orbiter
dictum statement that freedom of
establishment also covers the possibility
of a company converting itself into
a company governed by the law of another
member state, which is the de facto,
the transfer of the registered office.
You can see this in paragraph 111 to 113.
This announcement contrasts with
a statement in the same judgment,
some paragraphs previously,
in which the court says it should
be pointed out moreover, that
the Court also agreed to that conclusion
on the basis of the wording of Article 49.
The question whether and, if so, how
the registered office, the [FOREIGN] or
real seat, [FOREIGN] of a company
incorporated under national law may be
transferred from a member, from one
member state to another as problems which
are not resolved by the rules concerning
the rights of establishment, but
must be dealt with by future
legislation or conventions.
And you can see this in paragraph 108.
As a result,
the consequences of this obiter dictum for
board level participation rules,
have not been finally clarified.
However, there are good reasons for
saying that the obiter dictum
applies only if national law
completely forbids any kind of transfer
of seat to another member state.
As long as one form of transfer
is allowed under national law,
the treaty rules do not apply.
Now, the Marks and Spencers.
This judgment was anxiously awaited by
governments as well as companies, lawyers,
and academics.
Will companies be able to benefit from
loss relief in cross border situations?
Will there be major consequences for
member states national values?
Will there be a limitation of the effects
of the judgement for budgetary reasons?
The answers in short.
No temporal limitation, at first sight,
no major impact on national budgets.
Cross border, loss relief?
Yes.
Marks & Spencers, a company registered
in England and Wales, in 2001 ceased
trading in continental Europe, owing to
the losses recorded from the mid 1990's.
Subsequently, Marks & Spencers
claimed a group relief for
losses incurred by it's Belgian,
German and French subsidiaries.
This claim was refused by
the UK tax authorities.
UK resident companies in a group
may not tear off their profits and
losses among themselves, whether
losses are incurred by subsidiaries,
which have no establishment in the UK and
do not trade there.
Firstly the Court held that the UK
provisions constitute a restriction on
freedom of establishment.
The Court confirmed that the UK tax system
was in accordance with the principle of
territoriality enshrined in its national
tax law and recognized by EU law.
Nevertheless, it ruled that
this does not in, in itself,
justify restricting group relief to
losses incurred by resident companies.
And accordingly, the court dismissed
the UK's argument that non-UK resident and
UK resident subsidiaries were not
in comparable tax situations.
Regarding the justification, the court
accepted that the preservation of
allocation of taxing powers between member
states, the prevention of double relief,
and the risk of tax avoidance where
a multinational seeks to offset losses
against the highest tax rate profits,
taken together allow a member state,
generally, to deny
cross-border loss relief.
However, where there is no
local loss release whatsoever,
whether by carryback, current relief or
carry forward an unconditional UK
denial of cross-border loss
relief is disproportionate.
And this judgment raises many questions
such as, how can the members,
the judgment in the Marks and Spencers be
reconciled with the judgment in Futura?
Where the court held that the system,
which is in conformity with the fiscal
principle of territoriality, cannot be
regarded as entailing any discrimination,
overt or covert, prohibited by the treaty.
Question two,
has the Court changed it's practice of
striking down in its entirety a member
state tax provision where the application
of that rule would be disproportionate.
Three.
Why did the Court not expressly
deal with the preliminary
question on the disadvantage
connected to the choice of
the legal form of
the foreign establishment?
A disadvantage flowing from
the fact that Marks and
Spencers chose to locate establishments
in the other member states in the form of
subsidiaries rather than
in the forms of branches.
In conclusion, it can be said that
the member states have the right to
restrict cross-border
loss compensation if,
as a consequence,
the loss will be offset more than once.
That no double-loss compensation will
occur has to be proved by the company, and
this ultimately must be confirmed
by the national court of
the parent company's resident state.
It is clear that the chosen solution
by the Court raises more questions than
it answers.
We now refer to the Cadbury and
Schweppes case.
And this is also another tax law case.
The Cadbury Schweppes Group had
established two subsidiaries in Ireland
solely in order to that profits related to
the international financing activities of
the Cadbury Schweppes Group might benefit
from the more favorable tax regime there.
In the view of the national court
the subsidiaries were incorporated in
Ireland in order not to fall within
the application of certain UK
tax provisions on exchange transactions.
After the national tax authorities
demanded the corporation tax,
Cadbury Schweppes appealed.
In the end the relevant UK court
referred to the ECJ to clarify the EU
law implications.
And the EU law implications?
Well, once again, the freedom of
establishment was an issue in this case.
The question referred to the Court was
whether freedom of establishment precludes
national tax legislation, under certain
conditions, from imposing a charge upon
a parent company, on the profits
made in a foreign subsidiary.
And in the decision of the Court, the
Court indicates that it is necessary to
examine the behavior of a taxpayer
who incorporates a company in
another member state in light of
the aim of freedom of establishment,
in order to assess whether the behavior
at stake is a mere exercise of freedom of
establishment or illegal abuse.
And in this context, national measures
restricting freedom of comp-,
of establishment, may be justified
by they specifically relate to
wholly artificial arrangements,
aimed at circumventing application of the
legislation of the member state concerned.
The Court considered that freedom of
establishment requires a stable and
continuing basis in the economic
life of a member state other than,
than the state of origin.
Therefore, a company
cannot invoke freedom of
establishment in another member state for
the sole purpose of
benefiting from more advantageous
legislation unless the establishment in
the other member state is intended to
carry on genuine economic activity.
According to the Court, a restriction,
a restriction on the freedom of
establishment, is therefore possible in
cases of a letter-box or front subsidiary.
With this ruling, the Court seems to move
away from Centrals, where the company
founders set up a company that had never
engaged in any economic activity in its
foundering state, and was aimed solely
at avoiding Danish company law.
That turns us to
the National Grid Indus case.
And the decision of
the court in this case is,
is the UK migration charge
contrary to EU law?
In November 2011, the Court published its
decision in the National Grid Indus case.
This case concerns exit tax rules,
where there is a transfer of a company's
place of effective management to a member
state other than that in
which it is incorporated.
Although the case concerned
the Dutch taxation rules,
the case has potentially much wider
implications in, on the European market.
So the background into the case.
National Grid Indus, is a Dutch company,
relocated its place of effective
management from the Netherlands to the UK.
National Grid Indus held a sterling
denominated receivable from a UK group
company which showed an unrealized foreign
exchange gain at the time of emigration.
Under the tax treaty concluded
between the Netherlands and
the UK, National Grid Indus
tax residency was changed to
the UK after the relo, relocation.
The change of residence triggered
a Dutch exit tax liability.
The questions for the Court were one,
if a member state applies a final
settlement tax on the transfer of
the place of effective management,
can the taxpayer rely on Article 49 of
the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU?
Two, if yes, is a final settlement tax,
not permitting the possibility
of deferring that tax and
without the possibility of taking account
of subsequent decreases in value after
the transfer of the effective
place of management, justified by
the necessity of allocating powers of
taxation between the member states.
And finally, number three, does the answer
depend on whether the final settlement tax
is taxing a gain which would not be
recognized as a profit in the other state?
And by that we mean a currency gain that
would not arise in another member state.
So, what was the decision of the Court?
Well, the Court held that a Dutch company
transferring its effective management to
another member state
could rely on Article 49.
The answer to the second
question was also broadly, yes.
The Dutch rules place a cash flow
disadvantage on National Grid Indus which
does not arise if the effective management
is relocated within the Netherlands.
This deters companies relocating which is
a restriction on the freedom
of establishment.
A glimmer of hope for
the taxing authorities arose
when the Court stated that such a tax
could be justified by the necessity to
ensure a balanced allocation of
taxing rights between member states.
However, this was then measured
by the requirement for
such a tax to be proportionate.
And the answer to the third question is,
no.
It does not matter whether the tax
is on a gain that would not
arise in the receiving state.
In short, the Court found that an exit
tax, which does not give the right to
defer payment until the gain becomes
realized, is not proportionate.
The Court recognized that this could give
rise to an additional adminitive burden
as companies and tax authorities would
need to track assets following migration.
However, it did not consider this
to be persuasive argument for
not permitting a deferral.
The Court did, however,
rule that an exit tax regime that does not
take into account subsequent
decreases in the value of assets,
is not as such in breach of
the freedom of establishment.
The Court suggested that legislation
covering an exit tax should have
two options.
One, the immediate payment of tax on
unrealized gains, and a deferment
until the disposal of the asset, that
would be potentially with an interest.
And two, the amount would be fixed,
and the timing could differ.
Now there is a comparison with
other migration cases here.
The Court's decisions in DeLorme, and
Cartesio, also considered companies
wishing to transfer their legal seat,
the central management and control,
and in both cases the taxpayer lost.
The distinction between these cases and
National Grid Indus is
that National Grid Indus was not trying
to change its status as a Dutch company.
Indeed after the transfer,
it would still be recognized and
registered as a company in the Neg,
the Netherlands.
The Dutch legislation did not result in a
change to the company's legal status, and
thus did not affect whether
the company could rely on Article 49.
It merely applied a tax charge on the
transfer of the effective management of
that company.
[MUSIC]

