Our client, a company we told you
about in the introduction lecture,
has recently contacted us, because it
wants to know how to get protection for
photos that one of its
employees has taken.
Copyright protects original work in
the field of literature, artistic, and
scientific work, and gives the author
exclusive right under limited time.
There is also related rights,
which protect performing artists,
phonogram producers, film producers,
broadcasting organisations, and
certain database producers.
Like other intellectual property areas,
copyright is based on
the principle of territoriality.
That means that copyright and
related rights are protected under the
national laws of the individual states.
There is no community wide copyright.
But the different member states laws
are quite similar, as a result from
the harmonization by the Berne Convention
for the Protection of Literary and
Artistic Works which contains a rather
comprehensive range of minimum rights.
And are designed to guarantee
authors minimum protection.
It has 168 member states and
all EU members are Berne member countries.
The TRIPS agreement include standards
of mandatory provisions, which are at
a much higher level of protection
than the Berne Convention prescribes.
The different member states law are all
also harmonized by existing copyright
directives on different subject matters,
but no full harmonization directive.
The different directives shall be
interpreted in a uniform manner
throughout the EU, which also partly
harmonized the member states laws.
The related right had,
has also had to some extent been
harmonized by the Rome Convention for
the protection of performing artists,
producers of phonograms and broadcasting
organization and also EU directives.
What still remains
un-harmonized are moral rights.
But subject to the Berne Convention,
Article 6 Bis.
The author shall have the right to
claim authorship of his or her work.
The author may also be to
an action violating the work,
negatively affecting his or
her reputation.
The different rationales for
copyright protection is for example
argument that sees the work as
an emanation from the authors personality,
and that justifies both economic and
moral rights to the work.
Natural rights argument.
An author has a natural right over the
production of their intellectual labor.
Reward argument.
Copyright is guaranteed because we
think it's fair to reward authors for
creating work and giving it to the public.
Incentive arguments.
Production of literary and artistic work
is good for society and public in general,
and therefore, it has to be encouraged
to take place at an optimal level.
As we have seen, there is a large number
of EU directives covering copyright.
As I said,
there is not a community wide copyright,
more like a patchwork of directives
covering different subject matters.
These directives
are Directive 93/83/EEC on
the coordination of certain rules
concerning copyright and rights related.
Applicable to satellite broadcasting and
cable re-transmission.
1996/6/EC on the legal
protection of databases.
2001/29 on the harmonization of
certain aspects of corporate and
related rights in the information society.
2001/84/EC, on the resale right for
the benefit of the author
of original work of art.
2004/48 on the enforcement of
intellectual property rights.
2006/115 on rental ri,
and lending rights on
a certain rights related to corporate
in the field of intellectual property.
2006/116/EC are the term of protection
of corporate and certain related rights.
2009/24/EC on the legal
protection of computer programs.
2011//77/EC amending directive 2006/116 on
the term of protection of copyright and
certain related rights.
And 2012/28/EC on certain
permitted users of, or from works.
The term directive sets rules
about duration of copyright and
related rights in the member states.
But it also says that member states must
protect only original photos by copyright,
and unoriginal photos by related rights.
The directive of central importance is the
information society directive from 2001.
It has a more ambitious approach
towards reaching harmonization.
It harmonized essential rights as
reproductions rights, distribution rights
including exhortion, and also rights
of communication to the public.
And it also harmonized limitation and
exceptions.
The directive also
implemented the two treaties.
The WIPO Copyright Treaty and the WIPO
Performances and Phonograms Treaty.
Limitation and exceptions to exclusive
rights play a much greater role in
copyright than other IP laws.
They balance the rights and
interests of authors to protection of
their intellectual property with interests
of third parties to gain access to
the work and to fundamental human rights.

