[MUSIC]
Our client, the company we told you
about in the introduction lecture,
has recently contacted us because
it wishes to obtain protection for
a new product it has developed.
The company therefore wants to know how
to obtain a patent for an invention.
A patent can help the company
to get a better market position.
And the company can also
avoid competition in
those markets where the company
have patent protection.
A patent is an asset.
And it can be bought, sold, or licensed.
A patent can also make it
easier to attract investors or
find buyers if they,
they want to sell the company.
A patent can only be
granted after registration.
It's a very formalistic system with
strict rules and formal requirements.
To get a patent is quite costly,
because it's a self-bearing system.
If the company cannot afford a patent,
there's a possibility to disclose
the invention to the public so no one else
can obtain a patent for the invention.
The important thing here is to have proof
of it being made available to the public,
so you destroy the patentability.
The drawback is of course that
the company might get competitors,
as they do not have a patent.
Another solution would be to keep
it secret as a trade secret.
Identified in the 60s four arguments in
support of maintaining some form a patent
protection in response to those who wanted
to abolish the patent system entirely,
in the interest of free trade.
The first is the natural law argument,
which is based on the thinking that
inventors has a natural right to
the product of their mental labor.
The second argument is a reward
by monopoly justification.
It is just as unfair,
that there should be a reward for
contribution to the community.
The third argument is the monopoly
of profit justification.
This argument is based on the idea
that granting patent will
stimulate innovation by
securing economic development.
And, that a patent protection is necessary
to ensure that inventions are made.
The fourth argument is the exchange for
secret argument, which says that patent
act as an incentive to individuals or
organization to disclose information that
might otherwise have remained secret.
Patent also encourage information
to be disclosed in a way that
is practical useful.
All of these arguments can
of course be challenged.
As I said in the beginning
of this lecture,
a patent can only be granted
after registration, and
it can be granted by a domestic
patent office under domestic law,
or by European Patent Office in Munich
under the European Patent Convention.
There is also possibility for a company,
if it wants to protect the invention in
multiple countries, to get the centralized
search and international preliminary
examination of the patent application
under the Patent Co-operation Treaty,
administered by
World Intellectual Property Organisation.
The Patent Co-operation Treaty
is an international treaty,
with more than 145 contracting states.
The PCT makes it possible to seek patent
protection for an invention simultaneously
in a large number of countries by
filing a single international patent
application instead of several separate
national or regional patent applications.
The application is filed with the World
Intellectual Property Organisation, and
thereafter a central search is conducted
by a patent office appointed as
an international searching authority.
Which ends up in a written opinion
regarding the patentability of
the invention.
If required,
a preliminary examination can also be
performed by an intentional
preliminary examination authority.
It does not lead to a centralized grant,
though, the patent, since there is not
such thing as an international patent.
The granting of patent
remains under the control of
the national original patent offices.
So when the international search and
preliminary examination is done,
the application is forwarded by
the International Bureau of the World
Intellectual Property Organisation to
the patent offices of the contracting
states designated in the application.
And the national patent offices
examines the application according to
national patent law, and
the national offices decides
whether to grant the patent or not.
Now we move over the the European patent.
It's granted by the European Patent Office
in Munich upon one single application,
examination and registration procedure.
It's not a community patent.
European Patent Convention is
a multilateral treaty instituting
the European Patent Organisation and
it has 38 EPC contracting states.
All EU member states
are members of the EPC, but
the EPC is also open to non-EU members.
It provides an autonomous
legal system according to
which European patents are granted.
Once granted, it becomes separate patents
in the contracting states the company
have designated.
A European patent, is after it's granted,
basically subject to same conditions, and
have same effect as national patents.
Rules on infringement and invalidation
procedure is set by national laws.
Infringement and revocation is
subsequently heard by local courts.
The annual renewal fees for
maintaining the patent also have to
be paid in each contracting states.
So if the company choose
the domestic patent,
they will only get a patent
in that specific county.
If the company choose the European route,
once granted, the patent is treated
as a bundle of national patents.
In the near future another option
will be possible besides already
existing national patents and
classical European patents.
And that is a European
patent with unitary effect.
The planned unitary patent
will offer an alternative for
patent protection in Europe alongside
the national and EPO systems.
The Unitary Patent will be granted
by the EPO under the provisions of
the European Patent Convention, and
it will be a single patent with unitary
effect for the territory of the 25
participating members in the EU.
Spain, Croatia, and Italy are not today
participating in the enhanced corporation.
Community patent will coexist with
the national and EPC patents,
giving the inventors the option to choose
the system best suited for their needs.
The unitary patent
system also comprises of
an agreement on the Unified patent Court,
creating a specialized patent court with
exclusive jurisdiction for litigation.
The unitary patent system has not yet
entered into force.
Harmonization of EU member states
national patent law consist only of
one regional harmonization act.
The directive on biotechnological
inventions, 98/44/EC.
Differences in the legal protection of the
biotech inventions offered by the laws and
practices of different member states,
were found to create barriers to
trade enhance impede the proper
functioning of the internal market.
EU therefore found it necessary for
the smooth functioning of the internal
market to approximate laws of the member
states dealing with protection on patent
law concerning biotech inventions.
On the basis of the directive, shall
member states protect biotech inventions
under national patent law, and
adjust their national patent law,
when taking account of
the provisions of this directive.
In sum, there is no full harmonization
of the EU member states' patent laws.
[MUSIC]

