European Court of Justice is interpreting
all these existing directives, and
the number of cases has
increased over the years.
Many of these cases affect
fundamental notions of copyright,
especially in relations to
the Information Society Directive which is
very broad in its scope.
Copyright protects original work in the
field of literature, and artistic work.
The Bern convention states in
article two one that the expression,
literary and artistic works, shall
include every production in the literary,
scientific, and artistic domain whatever
may be the mode or form of its expression.
For example, books, dramatic works,
choreographic works,
musical composition with or without words,
cinematography, works of drawing,
painting, architecture, sculpture,
photography, works of applied art,
illustrations, maps, plans and sketches.
In addition to copyright, EU law
requires that member states protect so
called related rights or
neighboring right.
That is rights to protect performing
artists, phonogram producers,
film producers, broadcasting organization
and certain database producers.
ECJ expressed in the infopac
case c 5 from two 2008
the credit of getting the work protected
by copyright and that is originality.
In the sense that it is the author's
own intellectual creation.
An intellectual creation is something that
reflects the author's personality, and
ECJ has said that is the case, if the
author was able to express his creative
abilities in the production of the work
by making free and creative choices.
ECJ rule, preliminary ruling, in the joint
cases C-403 from 2008 and C-429 from 2008
Football Association Premiere League and
others in paragraph 98.
In the case, Painer C-145 from 2010,
which concerned a portrait photo,
ECJ specified.
That is the national
court's task to determine
whether the originality criteria is met.
What is relevent is if the work reflects
the author's personality and expresses
his or her free and crea, creative
choices in the production of the work.
Once the corporate has been
established to subsist in the work,
the question is about ownership.
Under e-law, the owner is the author
of the work, except for computer
programs created in the course of the
author's employment, which is regulated.
Member state's law differs when it comes
to corporate, for employers, in general.
For example, some member states
corporate created by the author
in the course of his or her employment
to the employer, and in other countries,
the employer must have a contract
with the employee to get a copyright.
In other, it's not possible to transfer
the ownership to the employer.
The exclusive right the author gets is
a reproduction right in Article 2 in
the Information Society Directive, which
covers an exclusive right to authorize or
prohibit, direct or indirect, temporary or
permanent, reproduction by any means,
and in any form in whole or in part.
The author also gets a distribution right
which is an exclusive right to authorize
or prohibit any form of distribution
to the public by sale or otherwise.
This right is exhausted that if
the first sale or other transfer of
ownership in a community is made by the
right holder or with his or her consent.
In other words, there is a community wide
exhaustion of national distribution rights
and exhaustion takes place if
a tangible copy, which has not
previously been circulated, is put in
the commercial circulation on the market
within one of the member states by
the rights holder with his or her consent.
The Information Society Directive also
gives the author an exclusive right to
authorize or prohibit any communication
to the public of their work by wire or
wireless fees including making of the work
available to the public in such a way
that member of the public may access them
from a place and at a time chosen by them.
The European Court of Justice has
interpreted the notion communication to
the public in a series of cases.
It has said that communication to
the public requires a fairly large number
of persons.
It had also said that,
that the profit making nature of
the communication plays a role.
The aim must be to obtain some benefit and
the persons should not mail it
have been caught by chance.
In some cases, the European court
of justice have required that a new
public has been reached
by the communication.
For example distribution of a signal,
enabling works to be
communicated by means of those
television sets used by hotel or
sports bar constitutes
communication to the public.
European Court of Justice has pointed
out in case law, that exception and
limitations shall be interpreted
in a strict manner because it
delegates from the general
rule of exclusive rights.
The information society directive
contains a three step test in order to
take a five five.
According to this test, the exception and
limitations provided for
in the same article, shall only be
applied in certain special cases which do
not conflict with a normal exploration
of the work or other subject matter and
do not unreasonably prejudice the
legitimate interest of the rightholder.
This directive provides for
a list of exception and
limitations to the reproduction right and
the right of communication to the public.
Some exception and limitations only
apply to the reproduction right.
Member states have the option of providing
for certain exceptions and limitations.
For example, educational and
scientific purposes, for
the benefit of public
institution such as libraries,
archives, for the purpose of news
reporting, for quotation, for
use by people with disabilities,
for public security uses,
and for uses in administrative and
judicial proceedings.
The directive also states that member
states in certain cases of exception or
limitation shall make sure that
the right holders should receive fair
compensation to compensate
them adequately for
the use made of their protected work or
other subject matter.
When applying the optional
provisions on exception or
limitation member states may provide for
fair compensation for rightholders
which do not require such compensation.
The protection is valid for 70 years
after the years of the creator's death.
If a work has several creators,
the protection is valid from
the death of the last creator.
If the creator is unknown,
the protection is valid for
70 years from the publication of the work.
If that time is unknown,
corporate allows for
70 years from the creation of the work.
The term of protection cannot be extended.
Corporate comes to existence without
registration or any other formalities.
The term of related rights
are mostly shorter, 70, 50, or
25 years, and calculated from
the date of first publication or
public communication of
the object protected.
The Information Society Directive
states that economic rights set out in
the directive may be transferred,
assigned or
subject to the granting of contractual
licenses without prejudiced
to the relevant national legislation
on copyright and related rights.
Some national laws requires that
contractor license is registered
to be effective between the parties but
also against third parties.
If our company wants to use a copyright
protected work, it must have an individual
license or pay a collective society
which is an agent for its member,
to collect license fees whenever
the work is used to sum up,
a voter can be protected by a copyright,
if it meets the criteria originality and
involves free and creative choices and
bears the or first personal mark.
Otherwise, it is protected
by a related right.
The ownership depends on the member,
states, national law.

