[MUSIC]
As you just heard from Justin, there is
a paradox in competition law and policy.
In order to get the benefits of a truly
competitive market, it is necessary for
the government to establish limit to
the freedom of commercial competition.
Restricting it to legit,
legitimate competition.
In legal term defined as
competition on the merits.
As long as firms even dominant firms
compete on their merits they do
not violate competition law.
However, it is very difficult to establish
what conduct reflects the notion of
competition on the merits.
The belief that competition among
undertakings produces the best outcome for
society is based on economic theory that
employs models as perfect competition,
monopoly, and
the concept of welfare inefficiencies.
The model of perfect competition
implies that when prices equals or
are close to marginal cost a market
is perfectly competitive and
all resources are allocated
in an ultimate way.
And this should be the ultimate
objective of competition law
even though impossible
to actually fulfill.
It is possible that competition law to
pursue other objectives however that is
actually truly controversial issue.
If it is accepted that welfare
inefficiency should be the sole or
even at least the main goals of
competition law it is much debates as to
what welfare standards should be utilized.
Should it be total welfare?
Consumer welfare?
How should market works?
And on what basis should competition
authority actually intervene?
There are four main schools of competition
analysis that are known as Harvard,
Ordo-liberalism, Chicago school,
and Post-Chicago school.
And what goes as standard
competition like should abide to
differs actually among these schools.
Ordo-liberalism was a school of
political theory that has been very
influential on EU competition law.
Wherever EU competition law has been
undergoing a process of change.
It is implied that the competition
areas has been used more narrowly and
perhaps more rigorously, based on
the welfare and efficiency standards.
Lately the pursuit of innovation and
the idea of dynamic efficiency have become
more attractive to competition lawyers
scholars and competition authorities.
In other words,
should competition law pursue the goal of
creating not only static
efficiencies there are low prices.
But also innovation, increased
production of new and improved products.
And in that case how should competition
law accommodate the goal of innovation?

