[MUSIC]
The purpose of merger control is to
enable society to regulate changes in
market structure by deciding whether two
or more commercial companies may merge,
combine or
consolidate their business into one.
Mergers naturally create permanent and
lasting changes of markets, beyond what
an agreement between undertakings or
conduct by dominant firm may cause, and
can therefore expect that mergers would
scrutinize more intense than
other forms of collaboration.
And in one way, they do.
There's a pre-notification system for
mergers under EU law.
Nonetheless, one should know that
mergers can be very good for society.
They may create efficiencies, it gives
entrepreneurs the possibility to exit.
So most mergers are actually good or
benign for society.
Prior to 1990 the Commission had to rely
on its powers under Articles 101 and
102 to prevent one firm from acquiring or
take over the business of another firm.
But in 1989 the council adopted
the EU merger control regulation.
The regulation came into force in 1990,
was amended in 1997 and in 2004, where it
also was consolidated into the current
merger regulation, 139 of 2004.
The 2004 merger regulation declares us
incompatible with the dominant market
concentrations with the community
dimension, which would "significantly
impede effective competition on the common
market or in a substantial part of it,
in particular as a result of creating or
strengthening a dominant position".
That is the prohibition.
A concentration though, if we try
to define that, occurs when two or
more undertakings on the market merge,
where one or more undertakings on
the market acquire control of
another firm or another undertaking.
The concept of EU Dimension
aims to ensure that these
mergers creating structural changes with
impact beyond the national borders of
their member states are appraised by the
Commission under the EU merger regulation.
It's a quantitative test, based on the
turnover of the undertaking's concerns.
In other words, concentration with the EU
Dimension are appraised exclusively by
the European Commission.
It's a one-stop shop.
And then scrutinized, of course,
under the EU merger regulation.
A concentration without this EU Dimension
are appraised on the national level or
of course elsewhere on the globe if
the mergers happen somewhere else.
Or if it's a very small mergers,
not at all.
Then the entities can merge or purchase
each other without actually having to
notify to any competition authority.
Concentration should be notified to
EU Commission prior to its completion, and
mergers are suspended pending actually the
investigation by the European Commission.
Such an investigation will
initially normally take,
take 25 working days,
while deepened investigation by
the European Commission are regulated
on a quite strict time schedule.
A phase two analysis for example
normally takes around 90 working days.
Most mergers are either good or
benign from a competitional perspective.
Mergers may however in,
in few cases actually significantly
impede competition on the markets.
Horizontal mergers between
competitors reduce the numbers of
players on the market and increase
the market share of the post-merged firm.
They may, may enable that firm to exercise
market power, either individually or
collectively for
a collusion of coordination with the other
firms operating on the same market.
Market power is initially
evaluated based on
the market share of the concerned
undertakings on the relevant markets.
While also new tests are being developed,
such as the upward pricing pressure test,
now also included in evaluation.
The UPP test implies that the merging
parties effect on each other is,
is analyzed in reference to
setting prices post-merger.
The offices also look at
other aspects of the mergers.
Will the merged firm be able to coordinate
or, or create non-coordinated effect?
Non-horizontal mergers may in certain
cases cause competitive concerns,
but often actually provide
greater scope of efficiencies.
Nonetheless, the Commission is concerned
that where one of the merged parties have
market power vertically, the merger
may cause actually foreclosure or
even coordination.
The analysis conducted by
the Commission is also take,
to take into consideration the likely
counteraction by customers and
suppliers to the proposed mergers, such as
what is called countervailing buyer power.
Will the buyers be able to fend off any
price hikes created by the merged firm?
Furthermore, efficiencies created due
to synergy effect by the merged firm
can be taken into consideration.
Such efficiencies may offset any
anti-competitive consequences.
Finally, there is a failing firm
exemption that applies when
one of the merged firm is expected of
failing and exiting in the market.
The merger may be allowed so not to
destroy the assets of the failing firm.
M&A, or mergers, is a natural part of
the economy in Europe and globally today.
It is a way to get a return on investment
and also create efficiencies and
cause firms and
organizations to constantly develop
to the needs of society and economy.
However, there are mergers that may
be detrimental to society and the EU
merger regulation is one tool to try
to prevent such mergers to materialize.
The EU merger regulation stipulates
that pre-transaction evaluation of
the post-transaction effects of
the merger's own competition.
Several if not all types of
large transactions resulting in
the acquisition of control over
business with a market presence may be
scrutinized by the Commission.
However few are actually prohibited.
The evaluation includes everything,
horizontal, vertical,
vertical and conglomerated effect
that cause significant impediment
of effective competition.
Then and then such impediment
that will lead to the creation of
strengthening of a dominant position.
That is what is prohibited.
[MUSIC]

