[MUSIC]
The objective of the EU public
procurement rules is a free market in
public procurement.
The main means by which the EU has sought
to create prosperity and to secure
peace in Europe is by creating a single
market by removing barriers to trade.
The creation of prosperity through trade
is based on the premise that opening up
markets to foreign competition
will improve economic welfare.
Removing barriers to trade
in government markets is
one aspect of this policy
of removing trade barriers.
And it is this which provides
the rationale and the legal basis for
the eru,
EU's regime on public procurement.
The rules on procurement that the EU has
created to implement this internal market
policy in public procurement
derive mainly from two sources,
the treaty and the procurement directives.
As to the former, the treaty contains
general rules that, inter alia,
prohibit member states from discriminating
against other member states, for
example, by reserving contracts for
domestic firms.
As we will see,
these rules apply in principle, but
with limited expect, exceptions to
all public procurement measures and
all types of government contracts.
We can refer to these as the negative
obligations of the treaty.
These rules are applicable and
they are enforceable in member
states without the need for
any implementing measures.
However, these treaty principles
alone were considered insufficient to
open procurement markets.
In particular, it was considered that
it was necessary for contracts to be
awarded by transparent procedures so
that authorities awarding public contract
could not disguise any discriminatory
behavior under a cloak of discretion.
Further, special provisions
were considered desirable to
ensure that the rules could be effectively
enforced by aggrieved tenderers.
To ensure this, the EU has adopted
directives which regulate award
procedures from major contracts.
These require, for example,
that states should advertise their
contracts across Europe and should award
them using only commercial criteria.
It has also adopted special
directives on remedies.
During inspirations of so
many directives, the court has also
recently ruled that the treaty itself by
implication imposes obligations to
award contracts in a transparent way.
In reaching this conclusion, the court has
sought to fill the gap that arises from
the fact that some important contracts
are excluded from the directives.
Since all contracts
are subject to the treaty,
the finding that the treaty also requires
transparent award procedures has
effectively brought these contracts under
a similar regime to other contracts.
To understand the current directives and
also the references in past court cases,
it is useful to know something of
the history of these directives.
The latest directives are to be
implemented at the latest in April 2016.
The former current procurement
directives were adopted only in 2004 and
was required to be implemented in
the member states by 1st of January, 2006.
However, procurement procedures had been
regulated to an extent by similar rules,
right back to the 70s.
The 2004 and
2014 directives merely consolidated and
amended the preexisting legal framework.
The current legal framework has
emerged through a number of
distinct phases of legislative
activity and reforms.
The history of the directors regulating
contract award procedures goes back to
1971, when a directive was adopted
to regulate public work contracts,
the Directive 71/305.
In 1977, a directive was adopted applying
similar rules to public supply contacts,
the 77/62 Directive.
The late 80s and early 90s saw a wave of
reforms of the public procurement rules.
These form parts of
the European Commission's drive to
complete the single market by 1992.
In a third run of legislation,
the directives on award procedures were
amended in light of the fact that the EU
and its member states had become party to
the new WTO Agreement on
Government Procurement, the GPA.
Under the GPA, the EU and member states
provide access to EU procurement markets
to certain third countries, the US and
Japan, whilst those countries in
turn undertake similar obligations towards
the member states and to each other.
The GPA does not, however,
govern the relationship of the EU
member states inter se,
as in between the member states.
One means of opening up
markets to trade is to
harmonize procurement procedures simply
for the sake of a common approach.
It is considered that foreign
suppliers are more likely to bid for
contracts when they are familiar
with the procedures involved.
Interestingly, although the EU regime
on procurement has certainly had
a substantial effect in bringing
about greater commonality of
procurement procedures between
member states, the development of
common procedures is not per se
the justification given for the EU regime.
And in fact, it is questionable whether
the EU legislator has legal powers
to harmonize EU laws simply for the trade
effect that follows from common laws.
On the other hand,
it is clear that the EU regime
seeks to develop the internal market
through at least three means.
One, prohibiting discrimination
in public procurement.
As we have seen above, this is so done by
the treaty itself, and nondiscrimination
provisions are also included in
explicit provisions in the directives.
Two, requiring member states to award
contracts through procedures that
are transparent to prevent them from
concealing discriminatory behavior behind
a cloak of subjective decision-making.
This has always been the primary
aim of the directives.
And three, removing certain
restrictions on access to the market,
even in certain cases non-discriminatory
restrictions that are disproportionate in
light of their objectives.
For example, the public sector
directive contains a limited list of
evidence that purchases
may require from firms to
assess their technical capacity in order
to limit the burden of, of participation.
[MUSIC]

