[MUSIC]
In this lecture we will first discuss EU
labor law regulation related to transfers
of undertakings, collective redundancies
and employer insolvency, and continue with
the consideration of information
consultation and worker participation.
The transfers of undertakings,
collective redundancies, and
employer insolvency directives,
often referred to as the restructuring
directives, were adopted in the 1970s.
The directives address social consequences
of restructuring and economic change
as relevant today as in the 1970s,
and aim to increase the protection of
employees and to promote industrial
democracy and worker participation.
The transfers of undertakings directive
aims at safeguarding the rights of
employees when a business is transferred,
and to provide rights to information and
consultation for workers' representatives.
The directive applies to any transfer
of an undertaking, business, or
part of an undertaking or
business, to another employer,
as a result of a legal transfer or merger.
The extensive case law of the Court
of Justice of the European Union,
on the very crucial concept of
a transfer of an undertaking,
has now been codified in the directive.
This definition of a transfer
of an undertaking,
covers many different situations and
in principle, includes contracting out.
The directive provides for
an automatic transfer of
the employment relationship and
the transferor's rights and
obligations arising from the contract
of employment to the transferee.
The transferee must continue
to observe the terms and
conditions agreed in any collective
agreement for a specified period.
The directive also provides
some employment protection.
The transfer of an undertaking does not,
itself, constitute grounds for
dismissal, but does not stand in
the way of dismissals due to economic,
technical, or organizational reasons.
The employer insolvency directive applies
to employees' claims from employment
contracts, against employers who
are in a state of insolvency.
The member states are required
to put in place an institution,
which guarantees employees the payment
of their outstanding claims for
remuneration for a specific period.
The collective redundancies directive
contains an obligation to inform and
consult workers' representatives,
as well as an obligation to
notify the competent public authority
of large-scar, scale redundancies.
This emphasis on information and
consultation can also be found in
the transfers of undertakings directive.
EU labor law aims for
a partial harmonization of information,
consultation, and worker participation.
When employers are contemplating
collective redundancies,
they must begin consultations with the
workers' representatives, in good time,
with a view to reaching agreement.
These consultations must,
at least, cover ways and
means of avoiding collective redundancies,
or
reducing the number of workers affected
and of mitigating the consequences.
The employer must also supply
workers' representatives with all
relevant information.
The transfers of undertakings directive
also provides that both the transferor and
the transferee are required to in,
inform the workers' representatives of
the date and reasons of the transfer, and
the legal, economic, and
social implications of the transfer.
But, what about a more general duty
to inform and consult workers?
Within the EU, the national systems
of information, consultation, and
worker participation
display clear differences.
The legal basis varies, and
there are differences in the ways in
which worker participation is delivered.
In so-called single-channel systems,
worker participation is
channeled only through trade unions,
while in so-called dual-channel systems,
worker participation is channeled both
through trade unions and works councils.
EU law, in this area, has developed
chrolong, chronologically starting with
worker participation relating
to specific questions,
such as transfers of undertakings and
collective redundancies as we have heard.
Then, to worker participation in
transnational companies through Eu,
European Works Councils, and
finally to a general framework for
information and
consultation at workplace level.
The subject matter of information and
consultation varies and
the degree of involvement also varies
from simple information to consultation.
And most intense of all, consultation
with a view to reaching an agreement.
Several attempts to
establish procedures for
transnational information and
consultation in the EU were made prior to
the adoption of the European Works
Council's directive in 1994.
The preamble to the directive emphasizes
that national procedures for informing and
consulting employees are often not
geared to the transnational structure of
the entity, which makes the decisions
affecting those employees.
The purpose of the directive is, thus,
to improve the right to information and
consultation of employees in union-scale
undertakings and groups of undertakings.
To that end, a European Works Council or
a procedure for
informing and
consulting employees must be established.
In respect of a general framework for
information and consultation,
after much discussion and
political compromise, the information and
consultation directive
was adopted in 2002.
The purpose of this directive is to
establish a general framework, which sets
out minimum requirements for the right to
information and consultation of employees.
The employer and
employees' representatives must
work in a spirit of cooperation.
And the directive provides different rules
on information and consultation, such as
an obligation to consult with a view to
reaching an agreement on decisions likely
to lead to substantial changes in work
organization or contractual relations.
To sum up, EU Labor Law, in this area,
is well developed and provides both for
important protection for individual
employees, and key procedures for
cooperation between management and
workers, and their representatives.
Thank you very much.

