[MUSIC]
The current economic crisis and the EU's
and the Member States' responses have
had important implications for
European labor markets and for labor law.
High unemployment,
especially youth unemployment, has had
devastating effects in many countries,
and has led to social protest and
unrest, and
put into question the EU's legitimacy.
The responses to the crisis have
varied among the member states and
have also come in different stages.
In 2008 and 2009 many member states first
put crisis related measures in place,
such as short-time working
arrangements and wage concessions.
The subsequent sovereign
debt crisis in 2010, caused
in part by governments’ attempts to
bail out banks in financial difficultly.
Led to fundamental financial and
governance reforms at EU level.
Since devaluation of the currency is
not an option within the Eurozone,
focus has instead been on
far-reaching austerity measures, and
e-regulatory labor-law reforms
in many member states.
These measures have targeted
employment protection regulation,
collective bargaining, and wage setting.
At the very heart of national labor
law and industrial relation systems.
And also crucially area which largely
fall outside of EU competence.
The member states that have been given so
called bailout packages by the Troika,
the European Commission,
the European Central Bank, and
the International Monetary Fund, for
example Greece, Portugal and
Ireland have been particularly affected.
The so called memoranda of understanding
accompanying the bailout packages and
signed by these member states
specify which labor law and
labor market reforms are to
be considered and introduced.
There are also signs that some governments
may be using the crisis as a cover.
For introducing further deregulation.
These developments have been harshly
criticised by the ILO, Trade Unions and
Labor Law Scholars.
And deep concerns have been expressed, for
example, as regards to the disrespect for
fundamental rights and the strong move
towards labor market flexibilization.
These reforms have also been legally
challenged at several levels, in national
constitutional courts, in the court
of justice of the European Union, and
before international human rights bodies,
such as the ILO and the Council of Europe.
Greece has particularly been in
the spotlight in this regard.
A number of preliminary references have
also been made to the Court of Justice,
related to national measures,
introduced as part of bail-out packages.
So far the court has refused to
apply the EU Charter to these cases.
By contrast,
the European Committee of Social Rights,
in relation to a number of collective
complaints, has found, for
example, recent Greek reforms to
be in violation of the right to
a fair remuneration and
the right to social security.
In 2011, the ILO sent a specific
high level mission to Greece and
the ILO committee of experts has
also expressed deep concern about
the Greek developments in relation
to conventions number 87 and
number 98 and the freedom of association
and right to collective bargaining.
The way in which the balance
between flexibility and
security is struck within
the EU has been debated.
The developments following the economic
crisis intensify these debates,
and some would even argue that
the economic crisis has given rise to
a crisis as regards the whole
of the EU and social Europe.
Thank you very much.
[SOUND]

