[MUSIC]
Labor law is central to the functioning
of society and economy, but
also to the everyday life of individuals.
Labor law regulates the individual
employment relationship and
employment rights, as well as
the labor market more generally.
The development and content of EU
labor law throughout the years and
still today reflect the tension between
the EU and national sovereignty,
economic and social integration, and
market and human rights discourses.
EU labor law is regulated by a complex mix
of treaty provisions, fundamental rights,
general principles of EU law, secondary
law, collective agreements at EU level,
case law from the Court of Justice of
the European Union, and soft-law measures.
To this,
we must add regulation at national level.
Social policy is often understood to
include areas connected to the welfare
state, such as social security, social
assistance, healthcare, and housing.
But at EU level, most of the hard-law
regulation in the area of
social policy actually
refers to EU labor law.
The European social model is an often
used but rather vague concept.
Values such as democracy, individual
rights, collective bargaining, and
equality of opportunity are central
to the European social model,
a model which is recognized
by all EU institutions.
Despite a common European social model,
there is still great variety
among the member states, labor law, and
industrial relation systems as regards,
for example, the importance
of constitutional principles,
the balance between legislation and
collective bargaining,
the degree of state intervention,
the role of courts and case law,
and the degree of trade union organization
and forms of workers' representation.
In this context, it is common to
refer to the Romano-Germanic system,
the Anglo-Irish system, and
the Nordic system of industrial relations.
EU labor law only aims for
a partial harmonization of
the different labor law and industrial
relation systems in the member states.
The personal scope of most EU
labor directives is defined in
relation to the different notions
of an employee developed and
existing in each of the member states.
However, in the area of
free movement of workers,
EU law contains a separate, autonomous,
and far-reaching notion of an employee.
And this uniform notion of an employee
has recently seemed to spread into other
areas of labor and equality law,
such as equal pay and working time.
There is no comprehensive
coverage of EU labor law and
it does not exactly replicate
national labor law.
In addition, EU labor law emphasizes and
regulates issues of
a cross-border nature and the intersection
between the internal market, and
fundamental freedoms,
and national labor law.
The legal framework for
the adoption of EU rules on labor law
has changed a number of times and
the treaty competence has gradually
expanded and is now quite extensive.
Secondary law is now
also well developed and
a large number of directives
have been adopted in this area.
But the development has not been linear.
There have been phases both
of activity and stagnation.
EU labor law is an area
of shared competence and
the principles of subsidiary and
proportionality are very important.
Article 3(3) of the Treaty of
the European Union is important for
labor law and highlights after the Lisbon
treaty the social market economy
as one of the main aims of the EU.
And this confirms the EU's economic and
social objectives.
In the social policy field more
specifically, Article 151 of the Treaty of
the Functioning of the European Union
provides that the Union and
the member state shall aim for,
for example, the promotion of
the employment, improved living and
working conditions, social protection, and
dialogue between management and labor.
But the competence of
the EU is still limited.
Central aspects of national labor law and
industrial relations system, such as pay,
the right of association, and
the right to strike, are excluded from
the EU's competence to adopt directives.
Though not from the scope
of the EU law as such,
a question to which we will return in the
lecture on freedom to provide services,
freedom of establishment, and
national collective labor law.
The traditional community method where the
commission proposes legislative measures
and the Council and European Parliament
adopt them is important in EU labor law.
Actually, the main body of EU labor
law is made up of directives,
which provide flexibility and
adaptability in relation to the variety
of national labor law and
industrial relation systems in EU.
Directives must be implemented in
the member states either by legislation or
by the social partners.
And by the social partners,
I mean employers, organizations and
trade unions, and
they use collective bargaining.
In national labor law and
industrial relation systems,
the social partners are often consulted
and involved in the legislative process.
And collective agreements regulate working
conditions and other labor law issues.
The Maastricht Treaty and
the social policy agreement first
introduced a similar process at EU level,
the so-called European Social Dialogue
now regulated in Articles 154 and
155 of the Treaty of the Functioning
of the European Union.
Before submitting proposals in the social
policy field, the commission must consult
the European social partners, employers,
organizations, and trade unions at EU
level on the possible direction of union
action, the so-called first consultation.
If the commission considers
union action advisable,
it must consult the European social
partners regarding the content of
the envisaged proposal,
the so-called second consultation.
The European social partners may
then inform the commission of
their wish to negotiate and
initiate the process provided for
in Article 155, possibly resulting
in European collective agreements.
Social dialogue actually takes place at
both cross-industry and sectoral levels.
And a number of agreements have been
reached across industry level, for
example, on parental leave,
part-time work, and fixed-term work.
These agreements can be
implemented either through a,
a decision by the Council and a directive,
or by the social partners themselves.
In recent years, the European social
dialogue across industry level
seems to have stagnated though.
Soft-law measures
are increasingly important in
EU labor law both as a complement and
alternative to hard-law regulation.
After the insertion of the employment
title into the treaty after Amsterdam and
the development of the European
employment strategy,
labor law is now seen as an integrated
part of employment policy,
which in turn is subject to the integrated
guidelines in the Europe 2020 strategy.
The Court of Justice of the European Union
has played a central role in EU labor law
and case law has contributed greatly
to the development of this area of law.
The principles and rules developed
by the Court of Justice in case law
have often been codified
later in secondary law.
The Court of Justice has frequently
strengthened the protection of individual
employees, but when faced with a conflict
between the free movement rules and
the employment rights,
it has favored free movement.
In recent years, not least after
the enlargement of the EU, it
has been increasingly difficult to reach
political agreement on hard-law solutions.
Instead, there has been a continued
emphasis on soft-law mechanisms and
an increased importance on
the Court of Justice and case law.
At an early stage, respect for fundamental
rights and freedoms became part of EU law.
And the Court of Justice jurisprudence
on fundamental rights and
general principles of EU law developed
with reference to constitutional traject,
traditions common to the member states and
international conventions, most especially
the European Convention of Human Rights.
The Lisbon treaty implies a new
emphasis on fundamental rights and
a further constitutionalization
of EU labor law.
According to Article Six of
the treaty of the European Union,
the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights
is made legally binding and part of
primary law, and the EU is to accede to
the European Convention of Human Rights.
Can you think of any rights or
freedoms in the EU Charter of Fundamental
Rights that are relevant for labor law?
Actually, the EU Charter of Fundamental
Rights encompasses several rights and
freedoms of great
relevance to EU labor law.
Such as respect for private and family
life, freedom of expression, freedom
of association, non-discrimination,
equality between men and women,
right to information and consultation,
right of collective bargaining and
collective action, protection in
the event of unjustified dismissal, and
fair and just working conditions.
At present,
as the case law of the Court of Justice,
on the EU Charter of
Fundamental Rights develops,
attention is drawn both to the content and
meaning of specific articles and
to the general scope, application,
and intepretation of the charter.
Today, EU labor law enjoys
elaborate treaty support and
encompasses a large body of secondary law.
The Court of Justice has also developed
a rich case law in these areas.
In the following lectures, we will discuss
the crucial interplay between EU law and
national law in this area, and
a selection of key labor law issues.
Such as restructuring of enterprises,
information, consultation and
worker participation, fundamental
treaty freedoms and national collective
labor law, flexible work and working
conditions, the EU and national labor
law in times of severe economic crisis,
and equality and non-discrimination.
Thank you very much.
[MUSIC]

