[MUSIC]
Cross-border issues
are central to EU labor law.
We will now explore
the important relationship, and
as it turns out,
conflict between the internal market and
fundamental freedoms and
national collective labor law.
We will focus on freedom to provide
services, freedom of establishment,
posting of workers, and
the right to collective action.
The free movement of services is one
of the fundamental treaty freedoms and
regulated in Article 56 of the Treaty of
the Functioning of the European Union.
Posting of workers, which means
the transnational provision of services,
whereby a company sends, or posts,
worker from one member state,
the so-called home state,
to another member state,
the so-called host state, to fulfill
a contract, raises important questions.
What wages and working conditions
should be applied to posted workers?
Should they be governed by the laws
of the host state or the home state?
And why is this important?
If home state laws applies, this puts
service providers from a state with
lower labor costs, for example, one of
the new member states, at an advantage
over contractors established in the host
state, which much pay higher labor costs.
If host state laws applies to the posted
worker, this competitive advantage is
lost, but protection against
social dumping is more effective.
According to the Court of Justice,
for example,
in the Sager-judgment, a restriction
of the free movement of services may
only be accepted if justified by
overriding reasons of public interest.
And if proportional, that is,
if the measure is suitable for
securing the attainment of
the objective pursuit and
does not go beyond what is
necessary in order to attain it.
Article 56 of the Treaty
of the Functioning of
the European Union is supplemented
by the Posted Workers Directive.
It has a two-fold and
conflicting aim to enable the free
movement of persons and services, and
to provide protection for workers in
the case of the posting of workers.
Article 3 of the Posted Workers Directive
lays down the so-called nucleus
of mandatory rules for minimum protection,
which the host member state must
ensure that the undertakings guarantee
to workers posted to their territory.
The terms and conditions and
questions can be laid down by
legislation and/or by collective
agreements declared universally applicable
within the meaning of Article 3(8).
This nucleus of mandatory rules covers,
for example,
maximum work periods and minimum rest
periods, minimum paid annual holidays,
the minimum rates of pay, health,
safety at work, and equality of
treatment between men and women, and
other provisions on non-discrimination.
Article 3(7) states that the directive
will not prevent application of terms and
conditions of employment which
are more favorable to workers.
The recent controversial case
law developments in this area,
such as the Laval, Ruffert, and the
Commission versus Luxembourg judgments,
and the debate they have caused
display a very clear tension and
difference of perspective between
the old and new member states, and
member states which are receiving or
sending hosted workers.
This case law clarifies that
the Posted Workers Directive
establishes only a minimum protection
of a nucleus of mandatory rules, and
does not provide for
equal treatment of domestic and
foreign employers as a means
of combating social dumping.
In other words, the host state can apply
its labor law rules to posted workers,
but only in the areas
listed in Article 3(1).
In all other areas,
home state law applies.
Furthermore, the cases show that the
directive is really a maximum directive,
establishing a ceiling for the terms and
conditions of employment that a trade
union or a state may require foreign
service providers to apply to employees.
Increasing European integration,
enlargement, and cross-border activity
highlight free movement and
economic freedoms, as well as the need for
social protection and the need to
protect against social dumping.
Important case law from the Court
of Justice, the Viking and
Laval judgments, addresses these issues.
The Viking case was referred by the Court
of Appeal in the UK to the Court of
Justice for a preliminary ruling.
It concerned dispute between
a Finnish trade union and
the International Transport Workers
Federation, on the one hand, and
Viking, a ferry operator, on the other.
Viking wanted to re-flag one of
its vessels from the Finnish flag
to the Estonia flag in
order to reduce wage costs.
As long as the vessel was
under the Finnish flag,
Viking was obliged under Finnish law and
the terms of the collective agreement to
pay the crew wages at the same level
as those applicable in Finland.
Estonia wages for
crew were lower than Finnish wages.
Re-flagging the vessel to
Estonia would enable Viking to
enter into a new collective agreement.
Since the International Transport Workers
Federation was running a campaign opposing
such flags of convenience, it sent out
a circular to its affiliates, asking them
in the name of solidarity to refrain from
entering into negotiations with Viking.
The Finnish trade union gave
Viking notice of a strike.
The Laval case was
referred by the Swedish Labor Court to the
Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling.
In May of 2004, Laval, a Latvian company,
posted workers from Latvia to
work on Swedish building sites.
The work included the renovation and
extension of school premises.
In June 2004, Laval and
the Swedish Building Workers' Union
started negotiations with a view to
concluding a collective agreement.
But Laval later signed collective
agreement with a Latvian trade union
regulating the work at the site.
Consequently, no agreement
was reached between Laval and
the Swedish Building Workers' Union.
In November, the Swedish trade union
therefore started collective actions
in the form of a blockade at
all Laval building sites, and
another Swedish trade union
took sympathy action.
After work on the site
had been interrupted for
some time, the company became gam,
bankrupt and the Latvian workers
posted by Laval returned to Latvia.
Viking addresses questions of
the compatibility of the right to
take collective action with the freedom
of establishment in Article 49 of
the Treaty of the Functioning
of the European Union.
While Laval addresses questions of the
free movement of services in Article 56,
the right to take collective action and
the Swedish implementation of
the Posted Workers Directive.
Today, we will focus on the right
to take collective action.
In both Viking and Laval,
the Court of Justice declared that
collective action fell within the scope
of the treaty and that Articles 56 and
49 could be invoked against trade unions.
The Court of Justice,
with reference to Article 28 of
the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights,
also recognized the right to take
collective action as a fundamental right
which forms an integral part of
the general principles of union law.
However, the exercise of the right to
collective action could be restricted.
The Court of Justice then considered in
Viking whether the collective action at
issue constituted a restriction
of the freedom of establishment.
And in Laval, whether the collective
action constituted a restriction on
the free movement of services.
Although in both cases
the Court of Justice
emphasized that the European Union
not only has an economic, but
also a social purpose, it concluded
in Laval that the collective action
constituted a restriction on
the free movement of services.
The Court of Justice declared that
the right to take collective action for
the protection of the workers
of the host state against social
dumping could constitute an overriding
reason of public interest.
However, the specific obligations linked
to the signing of the collective agreement
in the building sector in Laval could
not be justified as necessary to attain
such an objective, and
the collective action was unlawful.
Similarly, in Viking, the Court of
theJjustice found that the collective
action constituted a restriction
on the freedom of establishment.
But when it came to justification and
proportionality,
the Court of Justice instead left
the assessment to the national court.
However, it provided some guidance,
requiring the national court to
consider whether the jobs and conditions
of employment of the trade union
members on board the vessel were
jeopardized or under serious threat.
And if so, whether the trade
union did not have other means at
its disposal which were less restrictive
on freedom of establishment.
Only if these conditions
were satisfied would
the strike action be justified and
proportionate.
Both Viking and Laval have been
interpreted as putting fundamental treaty
freedoms and economic integration first,
and trade union rights and
social integration second.
The case has prompted huge and
critical debate.
And some member states, such as Sweden and
Denmark, have also had to reform the laws
on collective action and posted work,
especially those building on so-called
autonomous collective bargaining.
At EU level,
it was thought that the Lisbon Treaty and
the new emphasis on social market economy
might have changed the landscape.
In 2012,
the commission put forward two proposals,
a Monti II regulation on
the exercise of the right to
take collective action in
cross-border situations, and
a directive on the enforcement of
the posting of workers directive.
The Monti II regulation had to be
withdrawn by the commission following
serious opposition from the trade unions
and by many members states' parliaments on
grounds of subsidiarity, but the so-called
Enforcement Directive has been adopted.
Another important development post-Laval
and Viking has been the re-orientation
of the European court of human rights
case law regarding precisely freedom
of association, and the resulting,
possibly conflicting case law of
the Court of Justice of the European Union
and the European court of human rights.
This is crucial considering
the future accession of the EU to
the European Convention of Human Rights.
In two landmark judgments from 2008 and
2009, the case of Demir and Baykara,
and the case of Enerji Yapi-Yol Sen,
the European court of human
rights aligned its case law with
ILO Conventions number 87 and
98 on freedom of association and
right to collective bargaining,
as well as with the Council of
Europe's European Social Charter.
The freedom of association, as protected
by Article 11 of the European Convention
of Human Rights, is now said to comprise
also the right to bargain collectively and
the right to collective action.
The ILO Committee of Experts and the
Council of Europe's European Committee of
Social Rights have also expressed
concern about Viking and
Laval, and their implications for
national labor law systems and
found them to be in conflict with
fundamental trade union rights.
So finally, these developments
at the international level
prompt the important question,
are Viking and Laval and
EU law compatible with international
labor law, such as ILO Conventions,
the European Convention of Human Rights,
and the European Social Charter?
Thank you very much.

