Hello everyone, and welcome to
this lecture on Environmental Law.
You may wonder how if at
all is environmental law,
relevant to the study and
practice of European business law.
Today I will mention and briefly go
through three non-exhaustive instances
illustrating the high relevance of
environmental law in this regard.
First, environmental law may
create barriers to trade.
You might remember from the initial
lectures on the internal market,
that EU law prohibits such barriers.
The control of fiscal barriers,
prohibition of certain forms of
discriminatory taxation, state aid rules,
procurement law, and the free movement
provisions are clear examples of
treaty stipulations that aim to ensure
the functioning of the internal market.
For instance, Article 34 of
the Treaty of the Functioning of
the EU stipulates the prohibition
of quantitive restrictions between
member states on imports and
all measures having equivalent effect.
National environmental protection
measures may amount to
such prohibitive trade restrictions.
In case of the Court of Justice,
Commission versus Austria,
Austria was found to be in breach
of the free movement provisions
in trying to reduce air pollution
by prohibiting traffic of
heavy goods vehicles on a highway
important to inter-union trade.
There is much similar case law to this and
also certain exceptions
to the prohibition rules.
however, these we will not discuss here.
Instead, the key point to be made is that
to fully appreciate EU business law,
internal market law and environmental
law have to be considered jointly and
their overlaps and
intersections understood and studied.
Second, environmental law may be
applied to enhance economic prosperity.
Here, it is important to remember that
the union is regulatory in nature.
The foundation of the internal market
was a gigantic regulatory project
that includes the adoption of more
than 300 directives and regulations.
Only in the first five years, all aimed
at creating a market without frontiers.
This particular theory of governance
can be described to follow
a catchy motto as coined by Vogel
of freer markets, more rules.
Here it is important to know that
the type of rules that are enacted in
the EU are of importance also
in adopting environmental laws.
The core idea is that through better and
smarter, also environmental regulation,
the economy can be or will be stimulated
by creating so-called win-win situations
allow companies to behave responsibly and
maximize profits at the same time.
Here the economy and
the environmental protection are not
seen as being inevitable conflict.
Rather, the focus is on embracing the two.
This perspective has a number
of policy implications.
First, regulatory scenarios, including
employing clea, clean technology, and
the creation of tradeable permits
to natural resources are pursued.
As they're understood to result both
in enhanced economic efficiency, and
reduced damage to the environment.
In line with this rationale,
carbon markets, market and fishery quotas,
water markets that rely on market
mechanisms in controlling the use and
access to common resources are employed.
Second, this view recognizes that due
to the limited resources of the state,
it cannot be exclusively responsible for
protection of the environment.
And therefore a wider social
mobilization is required.
This is a consequence of creating
regulation that crosses boundaries,
between public and private law.
What this illustrates is that debates
on regulation are central to the EU.
It constructs the internal
market via regulation.
And it is also through the use and
interpretation of these regulations and
the relevant competences that the internal
market has progressed to secure high
standards of environmental protection.
At the same time, environmental
law tends to be constructed and
reformed so
as to help enhance this market and
its competitiveness indicating
a clear symbiosis between the two.
The significance of this is that
environmental law discourses in the EU
are inherently tied to the internal market
and more precisely, the EU legal order.
Third, and perhaps most importantly,
is that the process of
creating the single European market
realizes not only economic freedoms, but
also the protection of high social and
environmental standards.
This could seen in Article 3,
subparagraph 3 of the Treaty of the EU,
which provides that the Union
shall establish an internal market
that is a highly competitive
social market economy.
Aiming at full employment and
social progress and
a high level of protection and improvement
of the quality on the environment.
Moreover, article 114
subparagraph 3 of the treaty of
the functioning of the EU vests
regulatory power with the union
to approximate laws on the grounds
of the functioning of the internal
market obliged the commission to consider
a high level of environmental and
consumer protection in its legisl,
legislative proposals.
What this shows is that the internal
market follows deep social
structures that stretch far beyond
laissez faire policies of a market.
The idea of establishing a market with
a particular regulatory goal includes that
of environmental protection dates back to
the first environmental action program.
Which admitted that our harmonious
development of economic activities and
a continuous and balanced expansion
cannot be imagined in the absence of
an effective campaign to combat pollution
and nuisance of an improvement in
the quality of life and
the protection of the environment.
In the present constitutional arrangement,
Title 20 provides the legal basis for
environmental policy.
In addition, Article 37 of
the now legally binding Charter,
codifies the environmental protection,
meaning that safeguarding the environment
has obtained a human rights
significance in the EU legal context.
This shows that market
discourses in the EU are clearly
embedded in a kaleidoscope of aims,
including the creation of prosperity,
social security, and
environmental protection.
This demonstrates that
the market mentality at
the EU level is neither neutral nor
purely profit orientated.
Discussing environmental law
is thus inevitably tied to
a broader market discourse
particular to the EU.
So to sum this up,
understanding environmental law and
its position in the EU law more
broadly is a prerequisite to
understanding the operation
of the internal market.
Environmental law is relevant in this
regards, in many different ways.
As a possible trade barrier,
economic booster, and,
or indeed as a part of
the European legal ethos.

