[MUSIC]
My second lecture will deal with
the designation of the law applicable to
contracts and torts.
Or in other words,
the law applicable to contractual and
non-contractual obligations.
Let me start by refreshing your memory
concerning the example I
used in my previous lecture.
A Swedish company has signed, in Italy,
an agreement with a Greek company.
The agreement provides that
the Swedish company will repair some
machinery owned by the Greek
company in Hungary.
Subsequently, the parties disagree
on which of them is to pay for
the spare parts needed for the repair.
One of the parties claims compensation for
an alleged breach of contract by the other
party, or one of the parties asserts
that the whole contract is invalid because
of fraud committed by the other party.
And the parties disagree also on
which law governs these issues.
Similar problems regarding the designation
of the applicable law may also arise
in connection with non-contractual
obligations, where the alleged liability
does not arise out of a breach of a
contract, but is rather based on some kind
of alleged intentional or negligent act
causing damage to persons or property.
The designation of the law governing
a non-contractual obligation may be of
crucial importance for deciding such
methods as the extent of liability and
the assessment of the damage.
In the private international
law of the European Union,
the designation of the applicable
law to contractual and
non-contractual obligations is governed by
conflict rules found in two regulations.
Namely, a regulation from 2008 on the law
applicable to contractual obligations,
also called the Rome I regulation.
And a regulation from 2007 on the law
applicable to non-contractual obligations,
called the Rome II regulation.
An important feature of both these
instruments is that while they
are binding on the courts of
the member states only, the law
specified by them is applied whether or
not it is the law of a member state.
They made us read through the application
of Chinese, Russian or South African law.
There is no requirement of reciprocity,
because the law of a foreign country,
whether or not it is a member state,
is not applied in the interest
of that particular country.
But rather,
because the EU legislator himself is
of the view that the application
of the law deemed to
have the closest relevant relation
to the situation is conducive to
a reasonable resolution of disputes
having international implications.
Such application of foreign law
is therefore in the interest of
the European Union,
in particular because it contributes to
the smooth functioning of
international commerce.
The main principle of the Rome I
regulation on the law applicable to
contractual obligations is
the principle of party autonomy.
A contract is governed by
the law chosen by the parties.
The choice may take place at the time
of contracting or later, and
it can be explicit or otherwise clearly
demonstrated by the terms of the contract,
or by the circumstances of the case.
With some exceptions, the freedom
of choice of the parties is not
limited to legal systems having some
natural connection with the situation.
So that, for example, a Swedish and
a Greek company may agree on subjecting
their contract to English law, simply
because they both are familiar with it.
Surprisingly enough, the parties to
contracts of international nature
make relatively seldom use of their
freedom to choose the applicable law.
The reasons are manifold, ranging from
ignorance of private international law
to reluctance to burden contractual
negotiations with an additional
potential cause of disagreement.
Now, whatever the reason, the limited
use of party autonomy increases
the practical importance of
the Rome I regulations conflict rules
designating the applicable law in
the absence of choice by the parties.
The Rome I regulation contains a number
of seemingly fixed conflict rules for
some of the most common types of contract.
For example, to the extent that
the applicable law has not been chosen by
the parties, a contract for the sale
of goods is governed by the law of
the country where the seller
has his habitual residence.
And the contract for the provision
of services is governed by the law
of the country of habitual
residence of the service provider.
However, many important and
frequent contracts,
ranging from money loans
to trademark licenses and
equipment rentals, are not on the list.
Furthermore, it is not
uncommon that the contents of
the same single contract constitute
a mixture of several types of contract.
Such as when a contract for
the sale of equipment includes
the training of the buyer's staff and
the license to put the seller's
trademark on the final product.
Such so-called mixed contracts
are governed by the law of the country of
habitual residence of the party required
to carry out what the regulation
calls the characteristic performance,
meaning the specific performance,
as opposed to the performance
consisting of payment of money.
It is also permitted to deviate
from these conflict rules,
where it is clear from all
the circumstances of the case that
the contract is manifestly more closely
connected with another country.
Now, what has just been said applies
mainly to business to business contracts.
The regulation contains also
special conflict rules for certain
so-called weak party contracts, such
as contracts between a businessman and
a consumer or between an employee and
his employer, where an unlimited,
unlimited party autonomy could be
abused by the stronger party to
the disadvantage of the weaker party,
normally the consumer or the employee.
Therefore the regulation provides that
the typical consumer contract is normally
governed by the law of the country where
the consumer has his habitual residence.
And that the choice of another law,
while not invalid in itself,
must not deprive the consumer of
the mandatory protection, that is,
the protection the parties cannot
derogate from by agreement,
as provided by the law of his country.
Similarly, even though an individual
employment contract is in
the first place governed by the law chosen
by the parties, that choice must not
deprive the employee of the mandatory
protection he enjoys pursuant to
the law that would govern the contract if
the parties had not chosen another law.
With regard to non-contractual
obligations, the Rome II regulation gives
the parties some rather limited space
to agree on the applicable law.
But in most cases,
this is not a realistic, realistic option.
The main conflict rule of the regulation
stipulates that the law applicable to
an obligation arising out of a tort
is the law of the country in which
the damage occurs, irrespective
of the country in which the event
giving rise to the damage occurred and
irrespective of the country or
countries in which the indirect
consequences of that event occur.
However, if both the person claim to
be liable and the person sustaining
damage have their habitual
residence in the same country at,
at the time when the damage occurs,
the law of that country applies.
Another exception to the main rule
concerns those cases where it
is clear from all the circumstances
of the case that the tort is
manifestly more closely connected
with another country, in particular,
due to some preexisting relationship
such as a contract between the parties.
Regarding certain types of torts,
the Rome II regulation contains
special conflict rules
which prevail over the general conflict
rules that have just been described.
One such special conflict rule, for
instance, deals with the compensation to
be paid for environmental damage, and
gives the person seeking compensation
the right to choose to base his claim
on the law of the country in which the
event giving rise to the damage occurred.
Meaning the law of the country where
the harm to the environment originates.
Rather than to rely on the main
rule referring to the law of
the country of the resulting damage.
Both the Rome I and the Rome II
regulations permit the court dealing with
the dispute to refuse the application of
foreign law if such application would
be manifestly incompatible with the public
policy of the country of the court.
For example, a contract for
a payment of a bribe should, and
almost certainly would, not be enforced
by the courts of the EU member states,
irrespective of what the law
governing the contract says.
The application of some of the
traditional, but to some extent even of
some of the recent rules of private
international law, is affected by
modern technological achievements
such as the advent of the Internet.
Some of the jurisdictional and
conflict rules assume that it's
possible to ascertain, for example,
the place of contracting,
the place of performance of the contract,
the place of the harmful event, or
the place of the resulting damage.
The nature of the Internet has made it
possible, and in fact quite commonplace,
to both enter into and
perform a contract in cyberspace.
For example, today it is possible to
conclude a sale of digital goods,
such as, music, computer games, or
movies, pay for them, and
even have them delivered, on the Internet.
Harmful acts such as defamation or
copyright infringement can also
be committed in cyberspace.
All this constitutes a challenge
to private international law,
which has to be adapted, and
to some extent has already been adapted,
to our new digital world.
Within the framework
of this short lecture,
it is of course impossible
to enumerate and
describe all private international
rules enacted by the European Union.
These rules covering a great variety of
issues of both family and business law,
fill, today, hundreds of pages in the
Official Journal of the European Union.
And are often very detailed,
containing many exceptions and
exceptions to exceptions.
In addition to the voluminous regulations,
such as those enumerated in my first
lecture, many scattered rules of private
international law relevance are found in
various directives dealing mainly with the
approximation of substantive legislation.
For example, in the field of consumer law.
Also, the Treaty on the Functioning of
the European Union, which is itself
directly applicable in the court of
the member states, contains some
provisions with direct impact on
private international law issues.
For example, the articles prohibiting all
discrimination on grounds of nationality.
Or protecting the freedom of movement of
persons, goods, services, and capital.
One may, for example, raise the question,
of whether a non-recognition of
a same-sex marriage celebrated in another
member state would not be incompatible
with the free movement of persons,
as it would indirectly hinder
the persons involved from moving.
Or whether a non-recognition of a chattel
mortgage created in another member state
would not indirectly create an unlawful
obstacle to the free movement of goods.
Private international law has
traditionally been considered a small,
marginal subject that is of
interest only to a small group of
lawyers engaged in
international transactions.
The creation of the common internal
European market and the enactment of
voluminous EU legislation in this field
have changed the situation dramatically.
The negative side of this development
is that it has become very difficult,
if not practically impossible, for
judges and practicing lawyers to master
the subject and apply the rules correctly
without the assistance by specialists.
Unfortunately, in the law schools'
curricula in many of the member states,
private international law is not found
among the required compulsory subjects.
And it is offered,
if offered at all, merely as an elective
subject taken by a minority of students.
I'm happy and proud to say that at
my university, this is not the case.
And that all our students and
law graduates are made familiar with at
least the basic features of
private international law,
including of course, the private
international law of the European Union.
[MUSIC]

