[MUSIC]
The branch of law called
Private International Law,
deals mainly with family and
business relationships and
disputes having
international implications.
Today it is, for example, not unusual that
the marriage, or a contract is entered
into by parties who are citizens, or
habitual residents of different countries.
A harmful act is sometimes committed,
or the resulting damage arises in
a country other than that of those or
those where the parties habitually reside.
An object may be sold while
situated in one country,
but then subsequently be moved to
another country where the validity of
the sale is challenged and so on.
Now imagine that a Swedish company signs,
in Italy,
an agreement with a company in Greece.
The contract provides that
the Swedish company will repair some
machinery owned by the Greek company but
situated in Hungary.
Now just like purely domestic contracts,
without any foreign elements,
this agreement can conceivably
give rise to various disputes.
For example, the parties may disagree
on whether the price of the spare
parts needed for the repair is
included in the agreed remuneration.
Or one of the parties may
claim compensation for
an alleged breach of
contract by the other party.
One of the parties may even argue that
the whole contract is invalid because it
was entered into under the influence of
a fraud committed by the other party.
Now, whenever a business or
family relationship have a contract
connections with more than one country,
and thereby with more than one legal
system gives rise to a legal controversy.
The international character of
the situation causes a number
of complications.
To begin with, the contents of
the laws of the various countries
connected with the situation may differ,
and thus could lead to different outcomes.
It may, therefore, be necessary
to decide which of them should
govern the substance of the dispute.
It is not self-evident that the court
adjudicating the dispute should apply
its own law, which may have a very weak or
no relation to the actual situation.
It is more reasonable to apply the law of
the country with which the relationship is
most closely connected.
But which law is it?
Returning to our example.
Is it the law of the country
where the contract was signed?
That would be Italian law.
The law of the provider of
the repair service, Swedish law.
The law of the country of the customer,
Greek law.
The law of the country where
the repair has been carried out or
is supposed to be carried out,
Hungarian law, or some other law.
Now this is the moment where
Private International Law steps in, and
provides an answer to this question
by designating the law to be applied.
As the problem is often perceived as
involving a conflict between the legal
systems of the countries
connected in some way
with the legal relationship in question.
The rules designating
the national law to be applied
are commonly called conflict rules.
These conflict rules constitute the very
core of private international law.
Which is the reason why in some countries
for example, in the United States,
a private international law is
simply called conflict of laws.
An example of a typical conflict
rule found in Article 4 of the EU
regulation from 2008, on the law
applicable to contractual obligations.
Stipulates that to the extent
the law applicable
to the contract has not been agreed by
the parties themselves, a contract for
the provision of services should
be governed by the law of
the country where the service
provider has his habitual residence.
That is, in our example, Swedish law.
This example illustrates the fact
that conflict rules are mainly
of a technical nature.
They do not deal with the substance
of the dispute but merely with
a question about which national legal
system is to be applied to that substance.
Conflict rules are,
consequently, rules about applicable
rules rather than rules about reality.
In a wider sense, private international
law comprises not only conflict rules,
but even rules dealing with
certain procedural situations,
having international character.
The most important of such provisions
regulate the international
jurisdiction of courts.
That is, they specify which connection
between the dispute in a country
is sufficient to make the courts of
that country competent to adjudicate.
Returning to our example, if the Greek
company wants to sue the Swedish company,
does it have to do it in a Swedish court
or can it turn to a court in Greece?
Or perhaps a court in Hungary, or Italy?
Of great importance are also
rules on the recognition and
enforcement of foreign judgments.
If the Greek company obtains a Greek,
Italian, or Hungarian judgment against
the Swedish company,
can it have it enforced in Sweden,
where all the assets of the Swedish
company are assumed to be situated?
Traditionally, the rules of
private international law,
in spite of the word international
have been of national origin and
varied from country to country.
Due to the differences between
the various national conflict rules, and
due to the frequent non-recognition
of foreign judgments.
It could easily happen that for example,
the same contract was considered invalid
in one country, but not in another.
The same could occur in
the field of family law.
For example, a couple divorced in one
country could, in another country,
continue to be considered as married.
Such complications arise in spite of
certain efforts to resolve them on
the global level, even today.
But they are particularly problematic
in Europe, because they can
affect adversely the functioning of
the European Common Internal Market,
characterized by the free movement of
persons, goods, services and capital.
It is, at present, not realistic
to expect the total unification or
harmonization of the substantive
private law of the member states.
A European civil code will,
within the foreseeable future,
hardly be anything else than a dream.
This makes it particularly important
to unify the private international
law of the member states, so that
the law of the same country is applied,
regardless of in which member
state the dispute is adjudicated.
It is equally important that
the judgments given by a court of
a member state are recognized and
enforced in the other member states.
Since the turn of the millennium,
the European Union has therefore
been very active in the field
of private international law.
The legal basis of EU's legislative
competence regarding private international
law, is today Article 881 of the Treaty
on the Functioning of the European Union.
Which provides that the Union should
develop judicial cooperation in civil
matters having cross-border implications,
particularly when necessary for
the proper,
proper functioning of the internal market.
This cooperation in civil matters includes
taking measures aimed at ensuring,
among other things, the compatibility of
the rules applicable in the member states.
Concerning conflict of laws,
jurisdiction of courts, and
the mutual recognition and enforcement
between member states of judgments.
On the basis of Article 81 and
its predecessor, the European Union
has issued a substantial number of
instruments dealing in these matters.
The most important among them,
are the regulation on jurisdiction and
the enforcement of judgments in civil and
commercial matters, the so
called, Brussels I regulation.
The regulation on insolvency proceedings.
The regulation concerning jurisdiction and
the enforcement of judgments
in matrimonial matters.
In the matters of parental responsibility,
the so called Brussel II regulation.
The regulation on the law applicable
to contractual obligations, the so
called Rome I regulation.
The regulation on the law applicable
to non-contractual obligations, the so
called Rome II, regulation.
The Regulation of Jurisdiction, Applicable
Law, Recognition and Enforcement of
Decisions, and Cooperation in Matters
relating to Maintenance Obligations.
The Regulation Implementing
Enhanced Cooperation in
the Area of the Law Applicable
to Divorce and Legal Separation.
And last, but not least, the Regulation
on Jurisdiction, Applicable Law,
Recognition and Enforcement of
Decisions in Matters of Succession.
Now, all these regulations are binding
on the courts of the member states.
They are in principle to be understood and
applied uniformly in
the whole European Union.
And the auth,
authoritative interpretation of their
meaning has been entrusted to the court
of justice of the European Union,
which has already rendered a large
number of judgments regarding them.
A number of additional instruments
of EU Private International Law
are being prepared.
For example, rules on jurisdiction,
applicable law, and the recognition and
enforcement of decisions regarding
matrimonial property regimes.
But there still remains
several other issues,
not regulated by EU Private International
Law, and these continue to be governed
by the law designated by national conflict
rules of the member state of the court.
This applies for instance,
to the validity of marriages, or
the protection measures such as,
guardianship for adults who,
due to mental problem or age,
are unable to take care of their affairs.
It must be mentioned that due to special
arrangements, Denmark, in spite of being
an EU Member State, does not participate
in this legislative cooperation.
And that the United Kingdom in Ireland,
although not obliged to participate,
have in most cases,
made use of the right to opt in,
that is to decide to take part in this
cooperation, on a voluntary basis.
The creation and ongoing growth of
European Private International Law,
attracts the attention of
many legal academics, and
has given rise to
significant legal research.
An association of leading specialists
in the field is the European Group for
Private International Law, GEDIP,
which meets annually to discuss and
adopt recommendations concerning
current developments and projects.
The rest of today's lecture will deal
with the jurisdiction of courts and
the recognition and
enforcement, enforcement of
judgments in business disputes.
Due to time constraints,
I shall leave aside both family law and
the special rules protecting the weaker
parties, such as consumers or employees.
The, the relevant provisions are found
in the so-called Brussels I regulation,
that has already been mentioned.
Now pursuant to the main rule, a person,
who in the business dispute
is usually a company of some
sort, domiciled in a Member State, must be
sued in the court of that Member State.
While the persons domiciled
outside the European Union, remain
subject to the national jurisdictional
rules of the member state of the court.
For example, the United Kingdom has a rule
that grants their courts jurisdiction
against a foreign person, if
the documents instituting the proceedings
have been served on him during his
temporary visit in the United Kingdom.
This rather excessive ground
of jurisdiction continues to
apply in the UK if the defendant
is domiciled in, for
example, the United States,
Russia, or South Africa.
But it cannot be used if
the defendant is domiciled in, for
example, Sweden, because Sweden is
a member state of the European Union.
Some persons,
in particular in the United States,
have criticized this approach
as unfair and discriminatory.
The main rule on the exclusive
jurisdiction of the court of the member
state of the defendant's domicile,
is subject to several exceptions.
For example,
in matters relating to tort, a person,
even a domicile in a member state, may,
at the option of the plaintiff, also
be sued in another member state, where
the harmful event occurred, or may occur.
Some kinds of disputes must always,
irrespective of the domicile of
the defendant, be dealt with by
a court designated on another ground.
For example, proceedings have,
have their own objective rights in,
in movable property,
fall within the exclusive jurisdiction of
the member state in which
the property is situated.
The parties are also permitted,
under certain conditions, to agree that
the courts of a certain member state,
are to have jurisdiction to
settle disputes between them.
The prohibition of the use,
as against defendants domiciled in
the European Union, of excessive
national jurisdictional grounds,
such as the one mentioned
the United State Kingdom Rule.
They make it possible to be generous when
it comes to recognition and enforcement.
A judgment given in a member state is,
in principle,
recognized in the other member states,
and it is also enforceable there.
Even here there are exceptions, though,
such as where the recognition would be
manifestly contrary to the public
policy in the member state,
in which recognition is sought.
Or if the foreign judgment is
irreconcilable with the judgment given in
a dispute between the same parties there.
I cannot finish this extremely concise and
simplified introductory description
of the private international
law of the European Union
without having mentioned the existence
of extremely important ancillary rules.
Making the adjudication of
cross-border disputes simpler.
Such as The EU Regulations on the,
on the Service in the Member States
of Judicial and Extrajudicial Documents
in Civil and Commercial Matters.
And The Regulation on Cooperation
between the Courts of
the Member States in the Taking
of Evidence in such matters.
Thank you.

